The distinction between linear momentum and kinetic energy is sometimes a source of confusion for those
who never learned the basic concepts of classical mechanics, the linear momentum or, in short, just
momentum.
If one does not confuse it with the angular momentum which we described in the lecture on the spins
and then the intrinsic angular momentum of particles and that we will not describe further here, um,
the momentum is a physical property that, loosely speaking, tells us something about the amount of
motion of a particle or a body.
This is not the velocity because two particles with the same speed, but different masses will nevertheless
carry different amounts of momentum.
It makes a difference if a fever strikes you with 100 kilometers per hour or a truck.
So therefore, in classical physics, the momentum P is simply defined as a product of a mass M times
the velocity V.
S P equals M times V, which is a scholar product.
In fact, the bold here, the bold letters fonts here indicate a vector quantity, a velocity, and
consequently the momentum are both described by a direction and an absolute model's value.
What in physics is called speed is the absolute value of the velocity.
That is something independent from the direction.
But the velocity has a direction.
You know that an object can move in a direction with a particular speed.
So it moves in a direction with some velocity.
But the absolute value is the so-called speed, if you are acquainted with scholars and vectors, please
also see the corresponding section of the lecture in the appendix.
Momentum is useful to calculate elastic or inelastic collisions processes between bodies of different
masses and different speeds.
Momentum is sometimes confused with the notion of impulse, which is a difference of momentum a body
acquires after a collision.
So here we have a situation before and after the collision where you can see that how?
With what velocity?
A body moves before it hits another body and what the two bodies, what kind of velocities they have
after this collision?
All this has to be distinguished carefully from the concept of kinetic energy.
First of all, what is in what what is energy in physics, in energy and physics is the amount of work
that the system, a particle or body, can perform on another system in physics by work, which means
the capacity of a force to produce a displacement.
If you carry a heavy mass up to the top of the hill of a hill, you perform more work then by taking
up to the same height of the hill, if either.
More intuitively, work indicates the capacity to cause modification, transformation, disruption,
the heavy body you have lifted up to the top of the hill has therefore a potential energy.
It is potential because if you let it roll down the hill, it will acquire a velocity and therefore
acquire what is called a kinetic energy.
This kinetic energy is defined as half the product of the mass M times the velocity V squared.
As you can see in this formula here.
Another example that makes clear the difference between potential and kinetic energy is the energy stored
in a stretched in a stretched spring.
Once released, it will swing around to the equilibrium point, transforming periodically the potential
energy into kinetic energy.
Whereas the main difference between the momentum and the kinetic energy is that the former grows linearly
with velocity.
That is, you have this formula here, whereas the latter as the square of the velocity.
So this little V and V Square make the big difference.
Furthermore, since V squared is a scholar quantity, the product of two vectors is a scholar.
And you can see the appendix on the scholar and the Vector and Knowshon.
Since V squared is a scholar quantity, also, the energy must be a scholar, just a number.
Contrary to the momentum, momentum being a vector like velocity, energy is therefore always something
that does not depend from a direction.
It is just a number and it is usually expressed in jowls.
This is a measure of energy, both energy and as momentum must be conserved as well known, nothing
can be created or destroyed.
Really, there can only be transformed.
In fact, energy can exist in different forms besides potential or kinetic energy, such as the electrical,
energy, chemical and energy, thermal energy, nuclear energy and so on and so forth.
Much more should be said for a comprehensive and rigorous description of these two fundamental quantities
of physics.
But for now, this is sufficient for our purposes.
The important point is that you don't confuse one with the other.